# Exoplanet-Hunting

In this project, machine learning and deep learning techniques have been discussed and used to predict presence of exoplanet in deep space. The dataset used for the implementation NASA’s dataset of flux measurement from Kepler telescope of several thousand stars over time and associated variable of binary nature indicating the presence of one or more exoplanets in the stellar system. Three deep learning models, fully connected neural network, convolution neural network and recurrent neural network have been  implemented on the dataset.  Different pre-processing technique including SMOTE for imbalanced classes have been used for the model implementation. The performance of the models are compared on the basis of common classification metrics.

Most of the exoplanets discovered so far in small region of our Milky Way galaxy. The nearest exoplanet to our earth is the Proxima Centauri-b which is 4 light years away. As of 1 December 2021, there are a total of 4,878 exoplanets confirmed in 3,604 planetary systems with 807 systems with multiple planets orbiting the star. The discovery of new habitable exoplanets has been an interesting subject for scientists which can sustain life like that on earth. The discovery of new habitable exoplanets also has an intensified interest in the discovery of extra-terrestrial life.
There are thousands of planets to be confirmed as exoplanets. But it takes precious time and a lot of computational power to discover using telescope . This is where statistical models and machine learning techniques come into play. The time efficient property along with its excellent accuracy in classifying exoplanet candidate can be used for better results. In this paper, a fully connected neural network, a 1D convolutional neural network and a LSTM recurrent neural network has been implemented for exoplanet detection. The dataset used for the implementation models is Kepler labelled timeseries data. The dataset have been pre-processed prior to the implementation of deep learning models. The classification results of the algorithms have been presented in the paper. The classification metrics used are classification accuracy, precision, recall, f-score and  AUC score. These classification metrics have been used to evaluate the performance of the deep learning models on the dataset. 

Link to the dataset: https://www.kaggle.com/keplersmachines/kepler-labelled-time-series-data
